# River’s Story

By River Champeimont, March 31st, 2025

![A vibrant illustration centered around the words “TRANSGENDER LIFE” in bold, white block letters with a dark blue outline. The background features the colors of the transgender pride flag: light blue at the top and bottom, with light pink above and below a central white stripe. Surrounding the text is an arrangement of beautifully drawn flowers in pink, white, and blue hues, along with leafy branches. Several colorful butterflies flutter around the scene, adding a sense of movement and freedom. Sparkling stars and soft circular patterns give the image a magical, uplifting atmosphere.](TDOV2025/transgender_life_small.png)

If you only read one article about my transition, make it this one!

This is a piece I wrote for RBC’s intranet (where I work) for
*Transgender Day of Visibility*. I’ve only removed a few sentences that
contained internal company information.

Being trans is something you discover about yourself. It’s like being
born with the “software” of one gender but the “hardware” of another,
but it’s often hard to figure out.

![River is sitting on a wooden bench inside a museum. She is smiling gently with her arms crossed. She’s wearing a light-colored headband, a grey sweater, and a white collared shirt underneath. Her white shoulder bag is beside her on the bench. The background features stone walls, wooden beams, and a bright exhibition space with artwork and display cases.](we_are_more_than_atheism/picture_of_River_Jan2025_small.jpg)

My name is River and I’m a transgender woman.

## Egg Phase

*In the trans community, people who don’t yet know they are trans are
called “eggs”, before they “crack their egg” and realize they are
trans.*

Let’s go back in time. Before moving to Canada, I lived all my life in
France, close to Paris.

The earliest sign of me being trans was when I was a young kid. I told a
friend on the playground: “I wish I was a girl”. At the time, other kids
made fun of me for saying that, so I never talked about it ever again
during my childhood.

Later in life, especially after becoming an independent adult, I felt
this constant urge to look more feminine. I always wore clothes bought
in the women's section, but nothing too explicitly feminine, like
wearing skirts, because I felt it was socially off-limits. In the
summer, I presented so feminine that people would refer to me as
“ma’am.” I never corrected anyone; I liked it. But, as strange as it
might seem, I did not consider myself to be trans. I would not even put
a label on what it was. When asked, I justified it by saying: “I’m just
original.” In fact, I did not know much about what being trans was. I
knew someone who was trans, but I had no idea I could even be trans
myself, so I never considered this possibility.

One day, friends suggested putting makeup on me to make me look like a
woman, just for fun, and they felt I might enjoy it. I immediately
accepted. Then, we met on a weekend, and they made me up. I liked how I
looked, and I said: “I know exactly which clothes to wear to take
pictures in” and I wore a black denim skirt and a sleeveless shirt. No
one questioned why I had those clothes in the first place. We were all
just happy. I loved those pictures and posted them on social media. My
parents were worried I could get in trouble for that and receive
negative comments, but everything went fine. Reflecting now on this day,
I feel it was like testing transitioning just for one day.

But life went on. I focused 100% on building my start-up company, and I
had no time to think about myself. I looked pretty androgynous in my
day-to-day life though, with feminine clothes, long hair, no facial
hair, and I used every costume party at work to dress fully feminine. My
gender non-conformity was accepted and a known thing about me, even
though we put no name on it.

## Moving to Canada

Then, I emigrated to Canada. I had to open a bank account, get a local
drivers’ license, find a home, a job… I intuitively felt I had to hide
the “trans part” of me to “look normal”. So, I dressed in a boring
masculine way. But on the weekends, I met amazing people in the LGBTQIA+
community in Toronto, and I realized Toronto was an even more
open-minded environment than Paris. Outside of work, I started wearing
skirts in public (which I never dared to do in France), and people
seemed accepting. Then I started dyeing my hair again. In France I had
tried almost every possible hair color, purple being my favourite.

But something was wrong. I was getting older, and my body was becoming
less androgynous, for instance my hairline started receding and in
general my hair would get scarcer. As a result, I was looking more and
more masculine. I hated it, but I could not figure out that this
masculinization was the problem. Something just felt deeply wrong.

In the local LGBTQIA+ community, I met several non-binary people. I had
no idea such a concept even existed when I lived in France. For me this
opened a new possibility. Maybe I was like them? I started researching
it. The final step was reading this website “[Turn me into a non-binary
person](https://euphorbia-milli.notion.site/euphorbia-milli/Turn-Me-Into-A-Non-Binary-Person-4710c60a76a54347932fca656fb602dc)”
which explained how non-binary people felt. I found it very relatable.
This was a huge realization which brought me to tears.

Today, I know that I’m not a non-binary person, but a trans woman. This
realization came later in my transition, but before then, it was too
difficult for me to directly accept such a radical thing as being the
opposite binary gender.

## Transition

While I may not have been sure if I was non-binary or a trans woman, I
was sure of one thing right away: I wanted HRT.

HRT is the process of taking hormone medications to replace the hormones
your body produces on its own with the hormones aligned with your gender
identity. It makes your body “switch” its internal biology. In my case,
it slowly feminized my body. I was racing against time. HRT meant I
could stop the “natural” masculinization of my body, so I wanted it as
soon as possible. Two months later, when I received the text message
from my doctor saying I had the approval to start HRT, I went into a
meeting room to cry.

Later in my transition, I decided to change my name (to River,
obviously). I [announced my new name](I’m%20changing%20my%20name.md) on the Transgender Day of
Visibility.

I am thankful to RBC for allowing me to change my name (and email) in
all systems even if it was not my legal name. \[…\] I also sent an email
to my team explaining that I was changing my name to better match my
gender identity. My manager and team were fully supportive and started
using my new name immediately.

And then I did my final coming out a few months later, I explained I was
a trans woman and would now be using she/her pronouns \[…\]. That was my
second “coming-out” considering I initially came out as non-binary (and
at first switched to using they/them as pronouns).

![River is walking along a path at the edge of a forest in Vancouver on a sunny day. She’s turning slightly toward the camera with a soft smile. She’s wearing a purple cap, a black crop top, a short black skirt, and a white shoulder bag decorated with small pins. The path is bordered by tall trees and greenery.](TDOV2025/Vancouver_small.jpg)

## Liberation

Slowly, the effects of HRT have now largely taken effect on my body. I
started experiencing this new feeling for the first time in my life when
looking at myself in the mirror: I *liked* how I look. To be honest it
was not only HRT’s effects, I had also undergone surgery to feminize my
hairline, and laser hair removal on my face (and now electrolysis).

Now I’m not afraid of aging any more. I know several old trans women,
and I’m not afraid to look like them one day. I would choose that any
day over the appearance younger me had before starting HRT.

In addition to liking my appearance, being seen as the correct gender by
other people brings a lot of happiness. In my case it feels like a
sensation of relief and peacefulness, as opposed to a feeling of
“tension” that I would feel when people referred to me as a man before.

I know these days the world seems to become more intolerant of trans
people, and in general transitioning can mean stress, hard work, and
pain, but if you asked me if it’s worth it, then I would answer: *Yes,
absolutely*.
