What Does It Feel Like to Be Trans?

I’m sharing some intimate feelings about what it’s like to be trans
“from the inside.”

# The Strange

I’ve reached the point where looking at pre-transition photos doesn’t
even feel like I’m looking at myself. If the pictures are from early in
my transition, they feel more like, “Okay, I can tell that’s me, but
you’ve only just started transitioning.” But pre-transition photos just
feel like they’re pictures of someone else entirely. I know logically
they’re of me, but they look like they could be of a relative. I look
older (even though I’m actually younger in them), I look unattractive,
and worst of all, I look like a man. Overall, it’s as if someone had put
a curse on me to make me look like a completely different person—or like
seeing myself in a funhouse mirror at an amusement park.

# The Fear

Sometimes I wonder, “What if I was wrong?” about transitioning. I’ve
gone so far—changing my appearance, my reputation, my legal identity.
But then I ask myself: “Do I want to look like I did before?” “Do I want
people to call me he/him?” “Do I want my old name?” The answer is
obviously no. I don’t want any of those things.

The truly terrifying thought is: what if I had never realized I needed
to transition? Would I have slowly sunk into despair from the growing
dysphoria as I lost my androgyny with age? Would I have tried to bury
those feelings by chasing something else?

No one should have to endure being trans without knowing it. I wouldn’t
wish that on my worst enemy.

I sometimes wonder if some transphobes are actually trans themselves.
Statistically, some must be. It must be awful to know—consciously or
not—that the only way out of your misery is to embrace the very thing
you’ve committed yourself to fighting. Maybe, in that case, you never
find the exit.

<img src="media/image1.png" style="width:2.77292in;height:1.848in"
alt="Une image contenant croquis, dessin, Visage humain, dessin humoristique Le contenu généré par l’IA peut être incorrect." />

# The Surprisingly Not Strange

By society’s standards, I know I have a strange body. In either a men’s
or women’s changing room, my body wouldn’t match what people expect—I
have an androgynous body now, with both a penis and breasts. When I go
to a swimming pool, I use the women’s changing room and wear women’s
swimsuits, partly because it’s generally not acceptable to show breasts
in public, but also because it simply feels right.

Day to day, though, it doesn’t feel awkward at all. I’m used to seeing
myself this way, and it doesn’t bother me. In fact, I like my
androgynous body. It’s just amusing to remember that it’s unusual
compared to most people. Naked photos of me from before my transition,
on the other hand, feel absolutely disgusting—that contrast only reminds
me how much I truly love my current androgynous body.

<img src="media/image2.png" style="width:1.95104in;height:2.336in"
alt="Une image contenant dessin, Visage humain, croquis, vêtements de bain Le contenu généré par l’IA peut être incorrect." />

# The Amazing

The most amazing thing about transitioning is that I can behave in a way
that feels natural—being “sillier” or more vulnerable, for example, than
I ever was before. It might sound strange that I now feel allowed to do
things I couldn’t before, but that’s the reality. You might not notice
it day to day, but our society is still deeply gendered. We may have
moved past openly misogynistic ideas like “some jobs are for men and
others for women,” but the way we interpret behaviour is still very tied
to gender. When people see you as a man, they make you feel odd or out
of place if you act in ways that are culturally read as “feminine.”

Of course, you might be reading this and thinking that, for you, your
own gender feels completely arbitrary. That’s a valid experience
too—some non-binary people feel that way, and it’s called being agender.

For many of us, though, being seen as our true gender—the one we
transition to—means we can finally express our personality without
distortion. Trans people often say, “I can finally be myself.” It may
sound like a cliché, but in my own experience, it’s absolutely true.

<img src="media/image3.png" style="width:3.12in;height:2.07931in"
alt="Une image contenant Dessin au trait, croquis, dessin, Dessin de nu Le contenu généré par l’IA peut être incorrect." />

# The Unchanged

And finally, some things don’t change with transitioning. I still enjoy
the same hobbies: programming, electronics, anything related to
electricity. I still love playing Descent II (a “boys’” game) and
driving long distances. Some of these activities are more common among
men in Western society, but they aren’t inherently “masculine.”

Transitioning isn’t about becoming a caricature and giving up hobbies
you enjoy just because they’re typically seen as “masculine” (or
“feminine” for trans men). Sometimes, trans people do feel freer to
explore interests associated with their “new” gender after
transitioning—but that’s usually because they weren’t allowed, or didn’t
feel comfortable, exploring them before due to social pressure (for
example, ballet for a boy or car tuning for a girl). In my case, that
didn’t happen at all. I still enjoy exactly the same things I did
before.

# Conclusion

Being trans is a strange experience, and many of the specific feelings
that come with it are hard to relate to if you’re not trans yourself.
But when I talk to other trans women, I’m often surprised by how much we
have in common. We’ll find ourselves saying things like, “Wait, you did
that too?” or “I felt exactly the same!” It’s a remarkably universal
experience—full of variations, of course—but one shared within a very
specific part of the population.

<img src="media/image4.png" style="width:3.416in;height:2.27658in"
alt="Une image contenant habits, Visage humain, sourire, dessin Le contenu généré par l’IA peut être incorrect." />

PS: I had a lot of fun using ChatGPT to create those silly images.
